My name is Cruz Sanchez.
And this is the story of your life and your family.
First, where were you born and in which part? In
Mexico.
General Treviño Nuevo León. ¿Y
en qué año? En 1906, el día 3 de... El día
3 de mayo. Pues dígame sobre su mamá y papá.
Bueno, mi mamá... He came with me to the United
States. My father told my mother that he died in
Mexico. When I was four years old, I barely
remember. In what year did he
die? No, I don't know. But before his mother came to
the United States. Yes, very early. How many
children are in your family? How many children?
How many children? Oh, in my family? Yes. There are
three. Three? Only three? Yes. Who was the
majority? Amelia, Amelia Sanchez. Yes. And then?
Then, Concepcion Sanchez. Yes. And the baby,
Antonio Sanchez. Yes. A man. A man? Yes. Two women
and a man. But you? Yes, my family. Your family?
Yes. And you are the youngest? Oh, from my mother's
family? Yes. Oh, these are your children? Yes,
they are my children. Oh, yes, I understand. My
children. I ask about your mother and father's
family first. Brothers. Yes, brothers. That's
what you want to ask. Yes. Well,
there are two sisters,
women, and we are four men in the family. Yes. And I
am the youngest. Yes. And your family lived in
Mexico, in general? Yes, General Treviño.
Treviño. And what town is near General Treviño,
the biggest
town? I don't remember very well, but I think it's
Mierta Maulipas, I think. Yes. I think it's the
closest. Yes. And what kind of work did your father
have?
Well...
My mother said, many years ago, those people who
lived...
I think my father, his father...
I think they were like little children, my
grandfather. They traveled from one town to
another. in burros with, I don't know, with
merchandise that they were going to sell here to
other towns. Yes? Your grandfather? My
grandfather, I think. Yes. And in this general
Trabiño, another town? No, it was when they were
living, because my mother is from the state of San
Luis Potosí. Yes. My father was from Monterrey.
Yes, in the city. Yes, in the city. But I don't know
where his father lived. Yes. It would be more to the
other side of Monterrey.
And he was in the merchandise. Merchandise in
burros. My mother would tell him. I barely
remember. Yes. Yes. And your father, what kind of
work
did he have? He was a bricklayer. He made houses
with bricks. Ah, to make houses? Yes, to make the
walls of the house. Ah, yes. Of stone. Yes. In
Monterrey? Yes. And then in General Treviño? My
mother used to tell me that when they moved to
nearby beds to raise three children, he worked in a
ranch. Yes. Planting, the work of the boss, I
think. Yes. Yes. It was a ranch of another person.
Yes, of another person.
Yes. And your mother? Well, my mother was there.
Yes. And after her father died, what did her mother
do? Well, she worked to support us, the youngest
ones who were at home. She worked. What kind of
work? Well, in the kitchen, with other people. And
this was in general travel? Yes, in general
travel. For many years? Yes, but here we grew up a
little bit. And
then we came to the United States. I
was about 15 years old when I came here. You were 15
years old? Yes. And for what reason did your family
come to the United States? To work, because you
know very well that in Mexico it is very hard to earn
a living for food. Yes, why? Because she was the
only mother, you see? She had to work to keep us. And
in what year? Yo vine la primera vez que no he vuelto
a ir para atrás con el hermano mayor. Fue en 1918.
Pasamos aquí a Estados Unidos. Aquí el condado no
es. ¿En qué clase de, pues, en qué modo venían a los
Estados Unidos? Para trabajar, dijiste. By train
or what? By train. Before that, there was a train
here from Robes Town to Pérguit del Valle. Ah, yes,
from Robes Town. From which part of Mexico? From
General Treviño? Well, when did you leave Mexico?
Did you go through the border? In what way? Well, In
Rome? In Rome, Texas? Yes. That's where we crossed
over to this side? Yes, in Rome. And then where?
When we arrived here? Yes. From Rome, we came here
to a town where the train arrived, to Sanfordais,
Texas. I don't remember very well, but he was
retired from Rome. And that's where the train was
coming from. I don't know where it was coming from,
but it was coming from here. From there we came to
Driscoll, a town about 20 miles away. And from
there we went to Petronila, a ranch close by. I
don't remember exactly, but it was about 10 miles
away, I think. Yes. That's where we got to that
ranch. The Piscara Algodón.
Yes. And does everyone work in your family? Your
brothers? Well, my brother worked. The one who
lives here. Yes. And the older brother. The other
one was old. He didn't look. No? No. He played the
guitar. That's what
he did. And you? I was very young. When there was
cotton, we would play. That was all I did. Yes, you
were 15 years old. Yes, I was about 15 years old when
we came here to Petronilla. And in Mexico, are
there problems with the war in these days? Well, I
think so. I heard that there was war, fighting with
each other, the same brothers, the same children
from Mexico. And war is not the reason for
your family? No, I don't think so. No. There are no
problems for your family with war? No. Why not?
Well, I don't know. I can't understand if there are
problems between families.
Because among the families we were four men and two
women.
In these days in Mexico, what kind of things do you
remember about your home? What kind of house did
your family have there? Well, it was a very poor
house. I barely remember. A very poor house.
Because your mother was there? Yes, she was the
only one who worked there. And the town was very big
or small? No, it was a small town. They say that now
it's very big. I haven't gone back. Since 1918 I
haven't gone back. No? You've never visited
Mexico? No, ma'am. Why
not? No, I've never gone back. I haven't visited.
No. Never. Do you want to visit? Well, if I had a
chance one day, I could go, but who knows? I'm
already very
old. Is life very different here in Mexico? Oh,
yes. Some people who come from there tell me that
it's very hard to work there. They pay a lot of money
a day. Yes. About 30 or 40 pesos. 30 or 40 pesos, 45.
But
they almost tell me that with the 30 pesos they earn
in one day, they don't have anything to eat. One
day.
Because everything is very expensive. Yes. They
tell me that everything is very expensive. The
merchandise... to eat and all that, clothes
and everything. Once I was told by a man who was
working here that a pair of shoes... Who's like
these? Yes. They cost 400 pesos. Yes. It's pretty
expensive.
Like a person who has... I want some... three of the
family. You can't buy shoes for every boy or girl.
You can buy them, but I'm sure that in a week they
won't have food for the family. Yes. Is it better
here? It's easier to live here. It's easier to live
here, it's lighter. Yes. For a family that has
three or four families, it's much lighter here.
And
this is the reason why you don't want to live in
Mexico or other places? Well, I would like to just
go for a walk, not to live. I've spent most of my life
here. And if I leave now, since I'm old, where am I
going to work? I don't know how to work there. And
here, well, the time I've been
working here with this lady, with all the families
of God, I can do any construction work. Any. Not
very well, but I understand the work. And you also
had a family. In what year did you get married? I got
married in 1928. Yes. And where was your wife from?
My wife? Yes. Well, when... When I saw her for the
first time, I lived here for about a year, a year and
a half, around 1944. I lived here. And I lived here.
Yes. When I met her for the first time, My wife. In
what way is it possible to meet her? Well...
I was already old. I don't remember how old I was.
But more
or less, I was about... 19 or 20
years old. In the dance. Yes. There are many dances
here. Oh yes. We met for the first time in the dance.
Yes. I came to the dance too, and so did I. We made a
relationship.
We got married in a short time. And you have three
children? Yes, three children. And most of them
are called? Amelia. Amelia. Amelia Sanchez. And
Amelia is married? Yes, she is married. And
Concepcion Sanchez is the second. And Antonio
Sanchez is the youngest.
Yes. He is married too. Also? The three of them are
married? Yes, they are married. The eldest one
lives here in Petronilla. Yes. And the second one
lives in Por la Vaca. Yes. And Antonio lives here in
Corpus. In Corpus? Yes. And what kind of work does
your son have? He works as a mechanic.
Yes. And he has a school and everything. How old is
he? It took him a year to finish the whole big school
here in Robstown. Yes. But since he was very young,
he started working at a gas station here. Yes. When
I left school, I came and worked until about 10 or 11
at night. Yes. Helping there, selling gasoline
and other tires that accompanied. And after that,
he liked that job and he needed a year to finish
school. And then, he was sent to the service, to the
army. And that's it. There, he finished the school
that the government gave him. Ah, yes. And he
studied mechanics there too. And when he came, he
continued to work in the same garage.
Here in Clarewood. Yes. And soon after, the boss
couldn't work there anymore because he owed a lot.
And then he passed it on to him in the middle. Yes. so
that Antonio could make payments for what he owed
to the paper company and other things, to other
iron companies that he bought to make the car. Yes.
Well, Antonio gathered all the money and made a
payment there, another payment to another
company, until he paid everything that the boss
owed him. Yes. Then he bought everything from the
boss. Everything he had inside the farm.
And the husbands of your daughters, what kind of
work do they have? Antonio's
wife... ...was working for about a year,
recently, in a clothing store. And she left. She
left work. Now she's studying at school. I don't
know why she's studying there. She goes there in
the morning. I think it's like 2 in the afternoon.
At school, studying. All day? I don't know why
she's studying. Maybe she's going to get a job in a
store or something else. Do you think that studies
are a good thing? Yes, sure. Why is it good? What?
Studies. Why are studies good? Well, because if
you know more, one day you can get a job where you can
earn more money. Ah, yes? Is that true? It's true.
It's true. Because right now, a boy who doesn't
finish school, goes to a company to look for a
job. The first thing they ask him, the boss there
tells him, do you have your diploma? Yes. That's
the first thing they ask him. Yes. She doesn't ask
him if he wants to work. She asks him, do you have
your diploma? So I think the man can say, well,
there is work.
For this reason, it is necessary to study. And the
husband of your other daughter, what kind of work?
What kind of work did he have? The one in the middle.
He works in a school. Yes. In Buenavaca. A school?
Is he a teacher? No, no, no. A teacher? No, no, no.
He's not a teacher. When the children leave the
school, he cleans them. Oh, yes. The inside, the
floor, the walls, the floors, and all that. Yes.
That's the work he does.
And is he from Texas, or from which part? Who?
Lucas? Yes. He's from here in the United States.
He's from the United States? Yes. Is he the husband
of your other daughter? The older one? Yes. He
works in a ranch. Yes. Here in Petronila.
Yes. He's worked there almost all his life because
his father is a mayor of that ranch. He has...
I have known the father of my son-in-law who lives
in Petronila since 1918. When did you get married?
Yes. I knew the mother of my son-in-law, also a
lady. Ah. Since 1918. Friends for many years. Many
years. Yes. Well, I got married, your family, he
got married, your family, my nephew.
And then, from here in Petronila, he came to a ranch
here at the airport. It was a very big ranch there.
He was also in Mayoloma with that same boss. And
this boy, the husband of my girlfriend, she was
already old and they came here to school. My
girlfriend was also at school. And there they got
married. How beautiful. It's a good thing. With
families who are together and get married. Yes.
We've known each other for many years. Me and his
father. Is his father from Mexico or from here? No,
he's from the United States. He's from the United
States. For the rest of his life? Yes. He's the
mayor of that ranch. He's been the mayor for many
years. Before 1918? Yes. Before 1918. Yes,
because I was there in 1918. In 1919, with the
churrasco here in Corpus. Yes. I don't know if you
remember, but have you read in the books? Yes. I
think it was the first one, I think. Churrasco.
Yes. Stone. Stone. Like a hurricane? No. No.
Different. What kind of stone? Well, it's a lot of
air, very strong. Yes. Very strong. But it was
different from a hurricane. A hurricane. A
hurricane is different. It's a kind of, how do you
say storm? Tornado. Tornado? Yes. Yes. It's a
hurricane, pure air. Yes. It was in 1919.
Well, like... In about a month or two months, I came
here with my family. My eldest father, from the
whole family. From this family here in this ranch?
Yes. He lived there in that big house. Yes. So I'm
here with them, in the same family, working here.
Was this your first job here in the United States?
My first job here, yes. I was a kid here in
Petronila, picking cotton. Yes. I was very young.
Yes. And when I came here to work with the uncle, we
called him uncle. All the people call him uncle,
uncle. That's the father. This big father. The big
father. Everyone calls him uncle. Uncle Oro.
Uncle Oro. Well, where we are right now, there were
no houses here, nothing. No? Nothing, nothing.
Only his house. There was a shed where they had a lot
of cows and mules, horses, to work the land,
because in those years they worked with pure
beasts, horses, the land. Here in this place where
we are, it was a pure mountain. And here, Juan Deíce
gave the first job, taking out... Taking out the
mountain. taking out the mountain with a
sledgehammer. With a sledgehammer? Yes. I was
looking at my hands with some water balls here. Oh!
I was working like this, taking out the trees. Yes.
But I was very young, I was about 15, like 15 and a
half years old. Yes. And in the afternoon I was
looking at my hands here with some water balls. Ay.
What a job. It was the first job I did here. Yes. Here
in this little piece, we are talking right now. And
there are many trees here these days. Big or small?
Big. And small, big mosques and all that. Mosques,
everything. Everything. It's a pure mountain
here. A mountain, a big mountain. This is the
Hawaii that goes here in 44. Yes. It was pure land.
Pure land. It was pure land, just raised like that.
Back then there were a lot of guayines, bogues,
carts. There weren't many carts. Yes? There
weren't many at that time. Well, after the
elimination of the mountain and the fields, what
kind of crops? To plant cotton. Cotton. And corn.
And corn too. This seed that they plant now, they
didn't plant it to sell it like they sell it now.
Yes. They only used it for mules and horses. Yes.
That was all. But they didn't sell it. There were no
factories where they bought that seed. And were
there many families that lived here on this ranch?
Oh yes, many. How many more or less? I think there
were about ten families. Ten families? Almost a
small town. Yes, almost a small town. All that land
that you see on the other side of the house, the old
man's house, there are only houses for the people
who lived here, who worked here, in the works here.
Yes, on the other side of the road. On the other side
of the road. Yes. And these houses were made of
wood? Yes, made of wood. Yes, with light and things
like this? No, ma'am, at that time there was no
light. No? Just a third-person lamp. Yes? It was
everything. And how many fours did you have in
these houses? Well, there were some that had a
little room. Yes? There was another one that had
two. A small table like this, just standing. The
door, to go to the other room, everything. The
floor, just a table like this. Everything. Who
made these houses? Well, there were... I don't
remember, but when I came here, those houses were
already made. When I was 10 years old, I lived here.
My uncle
was a carpenter. He was going to build another
house. I think they came from Corpo. I don't know.
They came here to make houses for the people. A big
house to put corn and seeds for the horses. But now
there are no houses? No, not now. What happened?
Well, they removed them. Why? Well, now... The
uncle died. There wasn't much work left. People
started moving from one place to another. And then
they took all the land to plant his son-in-law. And
then the son-in-law left. And the land... The
uncle and auntie died. The two old men. They died.
Then the brothers were distributed from all over
the land. From all over the land, yes. From all over
the land. Each son got a little piece. Yes. How many
sons were in this uncle's family? The uncles
are... Let me see if I remember.
I think there are three men.
Yes. And three women. And three women too. I think
so. Quite a lot. And there are three women. And for
this reason, after the uncle died, each one of the
children had a smaller part. A part. I think it's
almost the same. Yes. It's the custom here. Well, I
think so. And Mexico is also the custom? I don't
know. You don't know? No, no, no. I don't know. I
don't know there. In your years here, do
you think about life in Mexico and here to make
comparisons?
The life in Mexico and here?
Yes. Well, for me...
For someone who has family, life is much better
here. To spend life with family.
Why? Well, I'm going to tell you why.
Because here there is more work. And
you can find... ...merchandise or food, whatever
it is... ...a little cheaper than in Mexico.
Yes. Although right now everything is a little
expensive here. Yes, right now it's bad.
Everything is expensive now. Right now it's
expensive too. Yes. Well... The war in Mexico, the
revolution. Do you know any stories about this?
About the revolution in Mexico? Yes, in Mexico.
About
what? About the men who were in the revolution or
what?
Well, yes. No, well, I don't know. I heard about it.
There comes Pancho Villa, Obregon, I
don't remember. And
this is a thing from your experience, but it's a
very old thing. Yes, many years ago. Well, some
people say that the revolution was a good thing for
Mexico, and others say that it was a bad
thing. What do you think about this? Well, because
I've heard of talks, now that I'm older, that there
were some who were in the revolution, fighting
for the good of Mexico, for all the people. They
weren't fighting like others, like the others,
because it was the government that was fighting
and others who stood up against the government to
fight. And there were some who talk now that they
were fighting so that the
poor people had something to eat. They stood up
against it.
Because of how poor there are many people. Well, in
Mexico, before the revolution, there were many
schools. For example, do you study in Mexico? Very
little. Very little. Yes, because my mom came here
and we have to work to maintain the trip. Yes. I like
how she maintained us when we were little. Yes. How
many years did you study? What? A little, but a
little is a year or two years in school? About two
years, three. Three? Yes. Did you read in Spanish?
A little. Yes, and write too. A little bit too. And
in English?
I'm going to tell you the truth. I haven't learned
English here with these people. They
speak Spanish. They speak Spanish to me all the
time. Yes. That's why I don't... I didn't learn to
speak well with them. I understand what they say
and all that. Yes. And it wasn't necessary to learn
English. Well, yes, but it's very hard for me to
speak English. Yes. A lady. Because if I say
something that is not right, there it is. It's very
different to talk to a lady than to talk to a
gentleman. Yes.
Is that true? Why? Well, because you can say
something bad when you're talking to a lady who
doesn't know English perfectly.
But you speak a little bit of English. Well, a
little bit of one thing, a little bit of another.
Yes. Well, this old man doesn't speak English, he
speaks Spanish. But I understand everything he
tells me. He brings me things from there, he tells
me in English, and I take it with me. This old man who
works here with you, he doesn't speak Spanish? He
speaks Spanish, but as I tell him. There are times
that he says something to me in Spanish
that is not true. But he is talking to me. And that's
what I say. If I start speaking English with you, I
can say something bad to you. And you don't think
so. That's why it's very hard to talk to a woman.
With a good man, it's much more different. Yes,
it's easier with men. Yes, because if you say
something bad, they don't pay much attention.
Well, yes, maybe it's easier for men to talk to men
and women. It's easier in many ways.
Yes, ma'am. Well, your children speak English.
Yes, they do. Antonio is the one who speaks the most
correct English. Because he studied it a lot. And
your daughters went to school, right? Yes, they
went to school, but they don't speak the correct
English like Antonio. You look at Antonio
speaking English, and you say, well, he's an
American who speaks English. Because he finished
the whole school when he came from the service,
from the army. Yes. He went to the school here in Del
Mar to finish the school. Ah,
yes. He went to the school to learn how to put
stickers on the cars. Yes. He finished that
school.
And then he went to school to study mechanics at the
distro. What do you call big engines? Diesel?
Diesel, yes. He went to school for mechanics. Yes.
And your children never visited Mexico either?
The older girl is the one who goes to Mexico
instead. No, thank God. How long have you been
doing this? I used to smoke... I used to smoke...
Cigarettes
like... Like 30 years. Yes. And now I have like...
Like 5 years left. Yes, I smoke in the house, one or
two. But at work I don't smoke anything. It doesn't
tempt me to see other people who are smoking to make
me want to smoke a cigarette. No. At home, yes. At
night, when I just finished dinner, I turn on the
TV, I grab a cigarette. I'm watching TV all the
time. Sentado.
Y usted vive cerca de aquí?